feat: adding new page for create custom serializers (#3151)
Kotlin/kotlinx.serialization: docs-website/topics/create-custom-serializers.md

> [//]: # (title: Create custom serializers)

Reviewer: Given that we have "Obtain (standard) serializers", the page should really be named "Creating and using serializers"

![Diagram where a Kotlin value is serialized by a serializer into a sequence of primitives, encoded by a format into encoded data, decoded back into a sequence of primitives, and deserialized by a serializer into a Kotlin value](serialization-encoding.svg){width="700"}

Serializers define serialization and deserialization strategies for a type through the [`KSerializer`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization/-k-serializer/) interface.
Kotlin serialization provides serializers for built-in types, collections, and more.

You can use these serializers to serialize values or inspect the structure of their serialized form, while custom serializers let you define that structure yourself.

## Obtain serializers

When you annotate a class with [`@Serializable`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization/-serializable/), the Kotlin serialization plugin generates a [`KSerializer`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization/-k-serializer/) for that class.

> To retrieve this automatically generated serializer, call the [`.serializer()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.builtins/serializer.html) function.

Reviewer: Remove KDoc link here, the function is generated inside user's project :) 
Also, let's rephrase to "call the _generated_ `.serializer()` function."

and specify serializers for the collection's type parameters.

Here's an example that uses the `ListSerializer()` function to create a serializer for `List<String>`:

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.builtins.*

//sampleStart
fun main() {   
    val stringListSerializer: KSerializer<List<String>> = ListSerializer(String.serializer()) 
    println(stringListSerializer.descriptor)
    // kotlin.collections.ArrayList(PrimitiveDescriptor(kotlin.String))
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

You can also use the top-level `serializer<T>()` function to obtain a serializer for a type, including nested generic types, without specifying a type-specific function:

> 

Reviewer: Sorry, "types, without specifying a type-specific function" reads horribly. WDYT of "You can also use the universal top-level `serializer<T>()` function to obtain a serializer for any type, including parameterized ones".

Tbh, this function is so much more convenient that I think it should go first in this list

Author: it works - also, we can put it up to the top 👍

    override fun serialize(encoder: Encoder, value: Color) {
        // Converts the RGB value to a hexadecimal string
        val hexValue = value.rgb.toString(16).padStart(6, '0')
        // Encodes the serialized value as a string
        encoder.encodeString(hexValue)
    }

    // Defines how a Color value is deserialized from a string
    override fun deserialize(decoder: Decoder): Color {
        // Decodes the serialized string value
        val hexValue = decoder.decodeString()
        // Converts the decoded value back into a Color
        return Color(hexValue.toInt(16))
    }
}
// Specifies ColorAsStringSerializer as the custom serializer for the Color class
@Serializable(ColorAsStringSerializer::class)
data class Color(val rgb: Int)

fun main() {
    val color = Color(0x00FF00)
    // Serializes a Color value to JSON
    val jsonString = Json.encodeToString(color)
    println(jsonString)
    // "00ff00"

    // Deserializes the JSON string into a Color value
    val deserializedColor = Json.decodeFromString<Color>(jsonString)
    println(deserializedColor.rgb)
    // 65280
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> #### Serialize binary data as Base64 strings

Reviewer: 4th level header makes it impossible to find in ToC. I think it's better be there, because this page is very long

You can use a custom primitive serializer to solve common serialization tasks beyond simple value conversion.
One such task is representing binary data as a [Base64](https://kotlinlang.org/api/core/kotlin-stdlib/kotlin.io.encoding/-base64/) string.

Different APIs use different Base64 variants by default.
Choose a Kotlin Base64 encoder that matches the expected variant, such as [`Base64.Default`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/core/kotlin-stdlib/kotlin.io.encoding/-base64/-default/) or [`Base64.Mime`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/core/kotlin-stdlib/kotlin.io.encoding/-base64/-default/-mime.html).

Here's an example that serializes a `ByteArray` as a Base64 string with `Base64.Default` in JSON format:

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*
import kotlinx.serialization.encoding.Encoder
import kotlinx.serialization.encoding.Decoder
import kotlinx.serialization.descriptors.*
import kotlin.io.encoding.*

//sampleStart
// Creates a custom primitive serializer,
// which represents ByteArray as a Base64 string

> @OptIn(ExperimentalEncodingApi::class)

Reviewer: Base64 is not experimental anymore

A surrogate class is a class that matches the serialized form of another class.

Surrogate classes are useful when the serialized form needs validation before creating the original class or when direct serialization doesn't fit the class's rules.

You can make surrogate classes [`private`](visibility-modifiers.md#class-members), and use an `init` block to enforce constraints on the serial representation of the class.
You can also [define a custom serial name](serialization-customization-options.md#customize-serial-names) to keep the serialized type name unchanged.

Let's look at an example that serializes `Color` as a JSON object with specific ranges for the `r`, `g`, and `b` properties:

```kotlin
// Defines a surrogate that matches the serialized form
@Serializable
@SerialName("Color")
private class ColorSurrogate(val r: Int, val g: Int, val b: Int) {
    init {
        // Enforces constraints on the serialized form
        require(r in 0..255 && g in 0..255 && b in 0..255)
    }
}
```

Similarly to [delegating serialization to another serializer](#delegate-serialization-to-another-serializer), the custom serializer converts

> the original class to another representation, but here it reuses the automatically generated `SerialDescriptor` instead of requiring you to create one manually.

Reviewer: "... but here it reuses serial descriptor" — it does not, in both cases we use descriptor wrapper with another name (`SerialDescriptor("my.app.Color", delegateSerializer.descriptor)`)

Reviewer 2: Maybe phrase it like "reuses the structure of the generated...". Whether this happens through wrapping or copying should be an implementation detail.

This can also improve performance in some cases.

To create a custom composite serializer:

1. Create a serializer as an `object` that implements `KSerializer` for the target class:

    ```kotlin
    object YourSerializer : KSerializer<Type>
    ```

2. Override the `descriptor` property and define the serialization schema with the [`buildClassSerialDescriptor()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.descriptors/build-class-serial-descriptor.html) function:

   ```kotlin
   override val descriptor: SerialDescriptor =
       buildClassSerialDescriptor("com.example.Type") {
           // ...
       }
   ```
   
3. Specify each property in the `buildClassSerialDescriptor()` function with the [`element()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.descriptors/element.html) function.
   The order of elements determines their indices, starting from `0`.

>    What each `element()` represents depends on the [`SerialKind`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.descriptors/-serial-kind/) of the `descriptor` property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What each `element()` represents depends on the [`SerialKind`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.descriptors/-serial-kind/) of the `descriptor` we are currently building.
```

Author: the spaces at the beginning are there for formatting only. (without it it breaks the steplist) 
I wouldn't use "we" here 🤔 — "we" is confusing in docs, the target should be the user

we only use it when we refer to JetBrains. (and even then sparingly, for things like: We are working on improving this feature in the upcoming releases etc. )

We could phrase it as : 

The [`SerialKind`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.descriptors/-serial-kind/) of the serializer's `descriptor` determines what each `element()` represents.

Reviewer: Sorry, accidentally removed spaces. What I tried to highlight is that `element()` also accepts SerialDescriptor, but we are talking about `descriptor` which is created with `buildClassSerialDescriptor`.

Author: Ah got it thank you 🙏 Do you have a preference here? 

So now we have the more direct version: 

> The [`SerialKind`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.descriptors/-serial-kind/) of the serializer's `descriptor` determines what each `element()` represents.

But we could also keep the original and add this information :

> What each `element()` represents depends on the [`SerialKind`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.descriptors/-serial-kind/) of the `descriptor` created by the `buildClassSerialDescriptor()` function.

   ```kotlin
   override fun serialize(encoder: Encoder, value: Type) =
       encoder.encodeStructure(descriptor) {
           encodeIntElement(descriptor, 0, value.first)
           encodeIntElement(descriptor, 1, value.second)
       }
   ```

5. Implement the `deserialize()` function using the [`decodeStructure()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/decode-structure.html) DSL.
   Inside its block, the lambda receiver is a [`CompositeDecoder`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-composite-decoder/), which you use to call functions like [`decodeIntElement()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-composite-decoder/decode-int-element.html) to decode each property.

>    The decoding order may vary depending on the format.

Reviewer: I would say that "Most formats allow data to come in arbitrary order, which is often not the order you described in the buildClassSerialDescriptor"

Author: to avoid the passive and to keep it a bit more generally applicable — or I might be missing something should the focus be on the buildClassSerialDescriptor? 🤔  wdyt : 

> Most formats allow encoded data in an arbitrary order, which can differ from the order of elements in the serializer's `descriptor`.

            var r = -1
            var g = -1
            var b = -1
            // Uses decodeElementIndex() since element order may vary by format
            while (true) {
                when (val index = decodeElementIndex(descriptor)) {
                    0 -> r = decodeIntElement(descriptor, 0)
                    1 -> g = decodeIntElement(descriptor, 1)
                    2 -> b = decodeIntElement(descriptor, 2)
                    CompositeDecoder.DECODE_DONE -> break
                    else -> error("Unexpected index: $index")
                }
            }
            // Validates values and reconstructs Color
            require(r in 0..255 && g in 0..255 && b in 0..255)
            Color((r shl 16) or (g shl 8) or b)
        }
}

// Specifies the custom serializer for Color
@Serializable(ColorAsObjectSerializer::class)
data class Color(val rgb: Int)

fun main() {
    val color = Color(0x00ff00)
    val string = Json.encodeToString(color)
    println(string)
    // {"r":0,"g":255,"b":0}
    require(Json.decodeFromString<Color>(string) == color)
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

### Encode default values in custom serializers

> <primary-label ref="experimental-general"/>

Reviewer: I'm going to stabilize this soon, so let's remove it right away

Author: removed the opt-in as well and the label

> If a property is annotated with [`@EncodeDefault`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization/-encode-default/), plugin-generated serializers don't call `shouldEncodeElementDefault()`.
>
{style="note"}

Here's an example where a custom serializer encodes default `Color` values when `encodeDefaults` is enabled:

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.encoding.*
import kotlinx.serialization.descriptors.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

// Creates a custom serializer for the Color class with multiple properties
object ColorAsObjectSerializer : KSerializer<Color> {
    // Defines the schema for the Color class
    override val descriptor: SerialDescriptor =
        buildClassSerialDescriptor("my.app.Color") {
            // Specifies each property with its type and name with the element() function

>             element<Int>("r")

Reviewer: btw, all these should have `isOptional = true` parameter. Let's add it and also move //sampleStart to make sure it is visible

            if (decodeSequentially()) {
                r = decodeIntElement(descriptor, 0)           
                g = decodeIntElement(descriptor, 1)  
                b = decodeIntElement(descriptor, 2)
            } else while (true) {
                // Ensures correct decoding for formats where elements may be unordered
                when (val index = decodeElementIndex(descriptor)) {
                    0 -> r = decodeIntElement(descriptor, 0)
                    1 -> g = decodeIntElement(descriptor, 1)
                    2 -> b = decodeIntElement(descriptor, 2)
                    CompositeDecoder.DECODE_DONE -> break
                    else -> error("Unexpected index: $index")
                }
            }
            require(r in 0..255 && g in 0..255 && b in 0..255)
            Color((r shl 16) or (g shl 8) or b)
        }
}
//sampleEnd

@Serializable(ColorAsObjectSerializer::class)
data class Color(val rgb: Int)

fun main() {
    val color = Color(0x00ff00)
    val string = Json.encodeToString(color)
    println(string)
    // {"r":0,"g":255,"b":0}
    require(Json.decodeFromString<Color>(string) == color)
}
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> ### Serialize third-party classes

Reviewer: I thought we agreed that this should be just "Applying/using custom serializers"? Also, header levels should be higher for easier navigation.

```kotlin
@file:UseSerializers(DateAsLongSerializer::class)
```

Here's an example:

```kotlin
// Applies the custom serializer to all properties of that type in the file
@file:UseSerializers(DateAsLongSerializer::class)

// Imports the necessary libraries
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.encoding.*
import kotlinx.serialization.descriptors.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*
import java.util.Date
import java.text.SimpleDateFormat

object DateAsLongSerializer : KSerializer<Date> {
    override val descriptor: SerialDescriptor = PrimitiveSerialDescriptor("my.app.DateAsLong", PrimitiveKind.LONG)
    override fun serialize(encoder: Encoder, value: Date) = encoder.encodeLong(value.time)
    override fun deserialize(decoder: Decoder): Date = Date(decoder.decodeLong())
}

// Uses the file-level serializer for the Date property
@Serializable
class ProgrammingLanguage(val name: String, val stableReleaseDate: Date)

fun main() {
    val data = ProgrammingLanguage("Kotlin", SimpleDateFormat("yyyy-MM-ddX").parse("2016-02-15+00"))
    println(Json.encodeToString(data))
    // {"name":"Kotlin","stableReleaseDate":1455494400000}
}
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> This applies the `DateAsLongSerializer`to all instances of that type within the file,

Reviewer: missing space

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*
import kotlinx.serialization.encoding.*
import kotlinx.serialization.descriptors.*

object ColorAsStringSerializer : KSerializer<Color> {
    override val descriptor: SerialDescriptor = PrimitiveSerialDescriptor("my.app.ColorAsString", PrimitiveKind.STRING)

    override fun serialize(encoder: Encoder, value: Color) {
        val string = value.rgb.toString(16).padStart(6, '0')
        encoder.encodeString(string)
    }

    override fun deserialize(decoder: Decoder): Color {
        val string = decoder.decodeString()
        return Color(string.toInt(16))
    }
}

//sampleStart
@OptIn(ExperimentalSerializationApi::class)
@KeepGeneratedSerializer
@Serializable(ColorAsStringSerializer::class)
class Color(val rgb: Int)

fun main() {
    val green = Color(0x00ff00)
    // Uses the custom serializer
    println(Json.encodeToString(green))
    // "00ff00"

    // Uses the plugin-generated serializer
    println(Json.encodeToString(Color.generatedSerializer(), green))
    // {"rgb":65280}

}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> ## Implement contextual serialization

Reviewer: Continuing the discussion: I think this should be moved under "Applying/using serializers" section

   > The [`@Contextual`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization/-contextual/) annotation is a shortcut for the [`ContextualSerializer`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization/-contextual-serializer/) class.
   > To apply contextual serialization across multiple properties in the same file, use [`@UseContextualSerialization`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization/-use-contextual-serialization/) annotation.
   >
   {style="tip"}

2. Create a [`SerializersModule`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.modules/-serializers-module/) with the [`SerializersModule()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.modules/-serializers-module.html) builder function.
   Use the [`contextual()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.modules/contextual.html) function to register the custom serializer for contextual serialization.

>     Without the `SerializersModule`, a `SerializationException` is thrown during the serialization or deserialization of contextually annotated types.

Reviewer: ... if they don't have a default serializer.

Author: added it 👍

[//]: # (title: Create custom serializers)

A serializer defines the structure of a Kotlin type in its serialized form, while formats such as JSON control how that structure is encoded.

> ![Serialization and encoding](serialization-encoding.svg){width="700"}

Reviewer: "Sequence of primives/sequenced primitives" is better, because "Primitive Sequence" can be read as "Sequence of something so simple, that we called it primitive"

> ![Serialization and encoding](serialization-encoding.svg){width="700"}

Author: Got it, let's go with "Sequence of primitives" then. 👍

> Kotlin serialization represents this structure with the [`KSerializer`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization/-k-serializer/) interface.

Reviewer: > serializer determines the specific serialization and deserialization through its interaction with the format. 

This is the most correct one, but it's also cumbersome.

I think we can sideline this into more like "Serializer defines serialization and deserialization strategies for the type". After all, KSerializer implements SerializationStrategy and DeserializationStrategy.

> Kotlin serialization represents this structure with the [`KSerializer`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization/-k-serializer/) interface.

Author: I like this the most 👍 

> Serializer defines serialization and deserialization strategies for the type

let's go with that

It provides serializers for built-in types, generic types, collections, and more.

> You can retrieve these serializers to inspect their structure, or create custom serializers to define a different serialized structure.

Reviewer: I'm still not convinced "retrieve" is better than "use"

> You can retrieve these serializers to inspect their structure, or create custom serializers to define a different serialized structure.

Author: It's mostly to match the title that follows, but I'm not beholden to it. If you think it's more correct, I agree; let's go with that.

Here's an example that defines a `Color` class with a single integer property and retrieves the structure of its serialized form:

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*

//sampleStart
@Serializable
data class Color(val rgb: Int)

fun main() {
    // Retrieves the generated serializer for the Color class
    val colorSerializer: KSerializer<Color> = Color.serializer()
    println(colorSerializer.descriptor)
    // Color(rgb: kotlin.Int)
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

For generic types, provide one `KSerializer` argument for each type parameter when calling the generated `.serializer()` function:

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*

//sampleStart
@Serializable
@SerialName("Color")
class Color(val rgb: Int)

@Serializable
@SerialName("Box")
class Box<T>(val contents: T)    

fun main() {
    // Calls .serializer() using a KSerializer for the type parameter
    val boxedColorSerializer = Box.serializer(Color.serializer())
    println(boxedColorSerializer.descriptor)
    // Box(contents: Color)
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> Unlike classes annotated with `@Serializable`, collection types like `List<T>` don't have a generated `.serializer()` function.

Reviewer: Where are builtin primitives? E.g. `Int.serializer()`.

To retrieve a serializer for a collection type, create one with [`ListSerializer()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.builtins/-list-serializer.html), [`SetSerializer()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.builtins/-set-serializer.html), or [`MapSerializer()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.builtins/-map-serializer.html)
and specify serializers for the collection's type parameters. 

Here's an example that uses the `ListSerializer()` function to create a serializer for `List<String>`:

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.builtins.*

//sampleStart
fun main() {   
    val stringListSerializer: KSerializer<List<String>> = ListSerializer(String.serializer()) 
    println(stringListSerializer.descriptor)
    // kotlin.collections.ArrayList(PrimitiveDescriptor(kotlin.String))
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> You can use the top-level `.serializer<T>()` function to retrieve a serializer for a type expression, including nested generic types:

Reviewer: 'always' meant 'when in doubts'. I.e., `serializer<Int>`, `serializer<List<Int>>`, etc, also work and you don't need to remember about `Int.serializer()` or `ListSerializer`. 

You can add 'When in doubts' or omit, I do not insist

> You can use the top-level `.serializer<T>()` function to retrieve a serializer for a type expression, including nested generic types:

Author: Ah I see 🙏  then I suggest something like this adding the part without specifying a type-specifc function:

> You can also use the top-level `serializer<T>()` function to retrieve a serializer for a type, including nested generic types, without specifying a type-specific function:

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*

//sampleStart
@Serializable
@SerialName("Color")
class Color(val rgb: Int)

fun main() {
    // Retrieves the serializer for the Map<String, Color> type expression
    val stringToColorMapSerializer: KSerializer<Map<String, Color>> = serializer()
    println(stringToColorMapSerializer.descriptor)
    // kotlin.collections.LinkedHashMap(PrimitiveDescriptor(kotlin.String), Color(rgb: kotlin.Int))
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

## Create a custom primitive serializer

> If you want more control over the structure of your serialized data, you can create a custom serializer.

Reviewer: You're mixing everything together here. Custom serializer is not necessarily primitive. Especially delegating one. This section should have been named "Creating a custom serializer". We start with the most easy one (primitive), then delegate, then surrogate. Consult original docs when in doubt.

    }
    ```

4. Implement the [`deserialize()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization/-deserialization-strategy/deserialize.html) function to define how to convert the serialized data back into an instance of your class. The [`Decoder`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-decoder/) provides functions to read the data, such as [`decodeString()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-decoder/decode-string.html).

    ```kotlin
    override fun deserialize(decoder: Decoder): Type {
        val decodedValue: String = decoder.decodeString()
        return // convert decodedValue back to Type
    }
   ```

5. Use the [`@Serializable`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization/-serializable/) annotation with the [`with`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization/-serializable/with.html) property to specify a custom serializer for the class:

    ```kotlin

>     @Serializable(with = YourSerializer::class)

Reviewer: Let's change it there too.

>     @Serializable(with = YourSerializer::class)

Author: changed it ✅

        other as Value
        return base64Input.contentEquals(other.base64Input)
    }

    // Computes hashCode based on array contents
    override fun hashCode(): Int {
        return base64Input.contentHashCode()
    }
}

fun main() {
    val string = "PNG_IMAGE_DATA"
    val value = Value(string.toByteArray())

    // Serializes Value to JSON
    val encoded = Json.encodeToString(value)
    println(encoded)
    // {"base64Input":"UE5HX0lNQUdFX0RBVEE="}

    // Deserializes JSON back into Value
    val decoded = Json.decodeFromString<Value>(encoded)
    println(decoded.base64Input.decodeToString())
    // PNG_IMAGE_DATA
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

### Delegate serialization to another serializer

You can serialize a class as another type by delegating the serialization logic to the serializer for that type.
For example, instead of serializing a class as a primitive value, you can break it down and serialize it as an `IntArray`.

To do so, create a custom serializer that defines a property for the serializer of the delegated type and override the following:

1. The `descriptor` property to wrap the delegated serializer's `descriptor`.

>     > When you delegate serialization, you can't use the original class `descriptor` or the delegated type's `descriptor` directly.

Reviewer: While omitting reasons for this does not hurt productivity, I still think that explaining what might go wrong helps reader deepen their understanding of the framework.

    > Instead, you must create a new `descriptor` that wraps the delegated serializer's descriptor. For example, `override val descriptor = SerialDescriptor("Color", delegateSerializer.descriptor)`.
    >
    {style="note"}

2. The `serialize()` function to convert an instance of your class to the delegated type and use [`encoder.encodeSerializableValue()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-encoder/encode-serializable-value.html) function to encode it with the delegated serializer.

> 3. The `deserialize()` function to use the [`decoder.decodeSerializableValue()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-decoder/decode-serializable-value.html) function with the delegated serializer to decode the value and convert it back into an instance your class.

Reviewer: an instance __of__ your class

Compared to using a [surrogate class](#serialize-classes-with-a-surrogate-class), creating a custom composite serializer lets you serialize the original object directly without an additional conversion step, which can improve performance.

To create a custom composite serializer:

1. Create a serializer as an `object` that implements `KSerializer` for the target class:

    ```kotlin
    object YourSerializer : KSerializer<Type>
    ```

2. Override the `descriptor` property and define the serialization schema with the [`buildClassSerialDescriptor()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.descriptors/build-class-serial-descriptor.html) function:

   ```kotlin
   override val descriptor: SerialDescriptor =
       buildClassSerialDescriptor("com.example.Type") {
           // ...
       }
   ```
   
3. Specify each property in the `buildClassSerialDescriptor()` function with the [`element()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.descriptors/element.html) function.

>    The order of elements must match the order used during serialization and deserialization:

Reviewer: Well, you later explain that deserialize() function works "regardless of order", so you contradict yourself.
It's better to say that "ordering is important because each element is implicitly assigned its index starting from 0. We will use these indices in the next steps."

   ```kotlin
   override val descriptor: SerialDescriptor =
       buildClassSerialDescriptor("com.example.Type") {
           element<Int>("first")
           element<Int>("second")
       }
   ```

>    > What each `element()` represents depends on the [`SerialKind`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.descriptors/-serial-kind/) of the `descriptor` property.

Author: 🤔 In that case, let's move it out but into the step. 👍

   Inside its block, the lambda receiver is a [`CompositeDecoder`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-composite-decoder/), which you use to call functions like [`decodeIntElement()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-composite-decoder/decode-int-element.html) to decode each property:

   ```kotlin
   override fun deserialize(decoder: Decoder): Type =
       decoder.decodeStructure(descriptor) {
           var first = 0
           var second = ""
   
           // Uses decodeElementIndex to ensure correct decoding regardless of order
           while (true) {
               when (val index = decodeElementIndex(descriptor)) {
                   0 -> first = decodeIntElement(descriptor, 0)
                   1 -> second = decodeIntElement(descriptor, 1)
                   CompositeDecoder.DECODE_DONE -> break
                   else -> error("Unexpected index: $index")
               }
           }
   
           Type(first, second)
       }
   ```

>    > The decoding order may vary depending on the format. 

Reviewer: That tip really should go together with the explanations for deserialize function.

            while (true) {
                when (val index = decodeElementIndex(descriptor)) {
                    0 -> r = decodeIntElement(descriptor, 0)
                    1 -> g = decodeIntElement(descriptor, 1)
                    2 -> b = decodeIntElement(descriptor, 2)
                    CompositeDecoder.DECODE_DONE -> break
                    else -> error("Unexpected index: $index")
                }
            }
            // Validates values and reconstructs Color
            require(r in 0..255 && g in 0..255 && b in 0..255)
            Color((r shl 16) or (g shl 8) or b)
        }
}

// Specifies the custom serializer for Color
@Serializable(with = ColorAsObjectSerializer::class)
data class Color(val rgb: Int)

fun main() {
    val color = Color(0x00ff00)
    val string = Json.encodeToString(color)
    println(string)
    // {"r":0,"g":255,"b":0}
    require(Json.decodeFromString<Color>(string) == color)
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

### Optimize deserialization with sequential decoding
<primary-label ref="experimental-general"/>

Some formats always store elements in order, while others may not.

> For formats that store complex data in sequential order, like JSON, you can create a more optimized deserialization process with the [`decodeSequentially()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-composite-decoder/decode-sequentially.html) function.

Reviewer: yup

    println(string)
    // {"r":0,"g":255,"b":0}
    require(Json.decodeFromString<Color>(string) == color)
}
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

## Create a custom serializer for generic types

To create a custom serializer for a generic class, provide one `KSerializer` for each generic type parameter.
Since each type parameter requires its own serializer, implement the serializer as a `class`, not an `object`.

You can delegate the serialization logic for each type parameter to the corresponding `KSerializer`, so it's encoded according to its own serialization rules.

Let's look at an example using a generic `Box<T>` class:

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.encoding.*
import kotlinx.serialization.descriptors.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
@Serializable(with = BoxSerializer::class)
data class Box<T>(val contents: T)

// Creates a custom serializer as a class for Box<T>
class BoxSerializer<T>(private val dataSerializer: KSerializer<T>) : KSerializer<Box<T>> {
    // Uses the descriptor from the provided KSerializer to define the structure of Box<T>

>     override val descriptor: SerialDescriptor = dataSerializer.descriptor

Reviewer: And here an attentive reader would ask you: "Stop, you repeated three times before serial names have to be unique, we can't just reuse descriptor directly!". And they would be right. We fixed  this bug in a doc recently: https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlinx.serialization/commit/bb67a8c0056c6208f3dbdbed362b95a8dc6b3faa#diff-5bebf151b2092e013adf4debcdfa0a45ce61f0f8a871cbc6f27a92117e124e77R953 (see line 953)

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*
import kotlinx.serialization.encoding.*
import kotlinx.serialization.descriptors.*

object ColorAsStringSerializer : KSerializer<Color> {
    override val descriptor: SerialDescriptor = PrimitiveSerialDescriptor("my.app.Color", PrimitiveKind.STRING)

    override fun serialize(encoder: Encoder, value: Color) {
        val string = value.rgb.toString(16).padStart(6, '0')
        encoder.encodeString(string)
    }

    override fun deserialize(decoder: Decoder): Color {
        val string = decoder.decodeString()
        return Color(string.toInt(16))
    }
}

//sampleStart
@OptIn(ExperimentalSerializationApi::class)
@KeepGeneratedSerializer
@Serializable(with = ColorAsStringSerializer::class)
class Color(val rgb: Int)

fun main() {
    val green = Color(0x00ff00)
    // Uses the custom serializer
    println(Json.encodeToString(green))
    // "00ff00"

    // Uses the plugin-generated serializer
    println(Json.encodeToString(Color.generatedSerializer(), green))
    // {"rgb":65280}

}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> 

Reviewer: Given that we also have example with `@KeepGeneratedSerializer` in json transformations, it makes sense to link them together. E.g. "It should come in handy if you want to transform data first and use original serializer later"

You can use contextual serialization to serialize `java.util.Date` in JSON format either as an ISO 8601 `String` or as a `Long`, depending on the protocol version being used.
This approach is supported by the built-in [`ContextualSerializer`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization/-contextual-serializer/) class.

Contextual serialization selects a custom serializer for a type at runtime from a ˙SerializersModule`.

To implement contextual serialization:

1. Mark the property in your serializable class with the [`@Contextual`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization/-contextual/) annotation .

   > The [`@Contextual`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization/-contextual/) annotation is a shortcut for the [`ContextualSerializer`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization/-contextual-serializer/) class.

>    > It's equivalent to using `@Serializable(with = ContextualSerializer::class)`.

Reviewer: Or we can remove sentence completely, it's quite long note already.

>    > It's equivalent to using `@Serializable(with = ContextualSerializer::class)`.

Author: 🤔  good point, I agree - let's remove it

> [//]: # (title: Create custom serializers)

Reviewer: Given we have 'Retrieve serializers' section, this title is inconsistent. Maybe "Using and creating serializers"?

Author: Hmm 🤔 good point 💯 , but we should still emphasize create imho - so let's go with Create and use custom serializers

(just as a note: please feel free to ignore the part about the links that this will break - I'll do a check on sandbox when we have everything merged to make sure it points to the right sections)

Reviewer: Not fixed

> A serializer defines the structure of a Kotlin type in its serialized form, while formats such as JSON control how that structure is encoded.

Author: good insight - I feel like this point already covers this idea. It's a bit light on the introduction but since we talk about them further down I think it should be enough

> You can use these serializers to serialize values or inspect the structure of their serialized form, **while custom serializers let you define that structure yourself.**

![Serialization and encoding](serialization-encoding.svg){width="700"}

Kotlin serialization represents this structure with the [`KSerializer`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization/-k-serializer/) interface.

> It provides serializers for built-in types, generic types, collections, and more.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what you meant by 'it'. KSerializer does not provide serializers, it _is_ a serializer ;) Library provides serializers for built-in types, etc.

Also, how "generic types" got there?

Ah, previously it was "Kotlin serialization" in the sentence above. Please do not forget to check that sentences still make sense together when editing one, otherwise this review will never be finished ;) Let's stick with "Kotlin serialization" then, because it encompasses both library and plugin.

    val colorSerializer: KSerializer<Color> = Color.serializer()
    println(colorSerializer.descriptor)
    // Color(rgb: kotlin.Int)
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> [Built-in primitive types and `String`](serialization-serialize-builtin-types.md) also provide serializers through the `.serializer()` function, such as `Int.serializer()` and `String.serializer()`.
> 
{style="note"}

For generic types, provide one `KSerializer` argument for each type parameter when calling the generated `.serializer()` function:

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*

//sampleStart
@Serializable
@SerialName("Color")
class Color(val rgb: Int)

@Serializable
@SerialName("Box")
class Box<T>(val contents: T)    

fun main() {
    // Calls .serializer() using a KSerializer for the type parameter
    val boxedColorSerializer = Box.serializer(Color.serializer())
    println(boxedColorSerializer.descriptor)
    // Box(contents: Color)
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

Unlike classes annotated with `@Serializable`, collection types like `List<T>` don't have a generated `.serializer()` function.

> To retrieve a serializer for a collection type, create one with [`ListSerializer()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.builtins/-list-serializer.html), [`SetSerializer()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.builtins/-set-serializer.html), or [`MapSerializer()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.builtins/-map-serializer.html)

Reviewer: Yes, I think "obtain" sounds better

> To retrieve a serializer for a collection type, create one with [`ListSerializer()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.builtins/-list-serializer.html), [`SetSerializer()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.builtins/-set-serializer.html), or [`MapSerializer()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.builtins/-map-serializer.html)

Author: Good point 👍 I changed it alongside the title to reflect this (also changed the ). I only left "retrieve" where it already exists.

//sampleStart
fun main() {   
    val stringListSerializer: KSerializer<List<String>> = ListSerializer(String.serializer()) 
    println(stringListSerializer.descriptor)
    // kotlin.collections.ArrayList(PrimitiveDescriptor(kotlin.String))
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

You can also use the top-level `serializer<T>()` function to retrieve a serializer for a type, including nested generic types:

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*

//sampleStart
@Serializable
@SerialName("Color")
class Color(val rgb: Int)

fun main() {
    // Retrieves the serializer for the Map<String, Color>
    val stringToColorMapSerializer: KSerializer<Map<String, Color>> = serializer()
    println(stringToColorMapSerializer.descriptor)
    // kotlin.collections.LinkedHashMap(PrimitiveDescriptor(kotlin.String), Color(rgb: kotlin.Int))
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

## Create a custom serializer

If you want more control over the structure of your serialized data, you can create a custom serializer.
A custom serializer lets you define how a type is represented in its serialized form.

> Like generated serializers, custom serializers also implement the [`KSerializer`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization/-k-serializer/) interface.

Reviewer 2: Technically it is the (`De`)`SerializationStrategy` that is needed for each side of the serialization.

Author: good point we can add `De)SerializationStrategy` to the sentence to be more accurate here. 👍 

We could do so like: 

> Like generated serializers, custom serializers define both serialization and deserialization for a type through the [`KSerializer`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization/-k-serializer/) interface.
> To support both, `KSerializer` extends [`SerializationStrategy`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization/-serialization-strategy/) and [`DeserializationStrategy`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization/-deserialization-strategy/).
>

> You can also [modify the JSON output](serialization-transform-json.md) produced by an existing serializer without redefining its structure with `JsonTransformingSerializer`.
> 

> {style="tip"}

Author: very good point added clarifying part: "For JSON serialization..."

    override fun serialize(encoder: Encoder, value: Color) {
        // Converts the RGB value to a hexadecimal string
        val hexValue = value.rgb.toString(16).padStart(6, '0')
        // Encodes the serialized value as a string
        encoder.encodeString(hexValue)
    }

    // Defines how a Color value is deserialized from a string
    override fun deserialize(decoder: Decoder): Color {
        // Decodes the serialized string value
        val hexValue = decoder.decodeString()
        // Converts the decoded value back into a Color
        return Color(hexValue.toInt(16))
    }
}
// Specifies ColorAsStringSerializer as the custom serializer for the Color class
@Serializable(ColorAsStringSerializer::class)
data class Color(val rgb: Int)

fun main() {
    val color = Color(0x00FF00)
    // Serializes a Color value to JSON
    val jsonString = Json.encodeToString(color)
    println(jsonString)
    // "00ff00"

    // Deserializes the JSON string into a Color value
    val deserializedColor = Json.decodeFromString<Color>(jsonString)
    println(deserializedColor.rgb)
    // 65280
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

#### Serialize binary data as Base64 strings

> You can also use a custom primitive serializer to solve common serialization tasks beyond simple value conversion.

Reviewer: Not sure we need 'also' here, rest is fine.

Author: it refers back to the previous section which this is a subsection of - but yea I agree with you it's not necessary - I removed it 👍

One such task is representing binary data as a [Base64](https://kotlinlang.org/api/core/kotlin-stdlib/kotlin.io.encoding/-base64/) string.

> Different implementations use different Base64 variants by default.

Reviewer: 'implementations' sounds too vague, maybe APIs?

Author: I like it sure, let's go with APIs.

    override fun hashCode(): Int {
        return base64Input.contentHashCode()
    }
}

fun main() {
    val string = "PNG_IMAGE_DATA"
    val value = Value(string.toByteArray())

    // Serializes Value to JSON
    val encoded = Json.encodeToString(value)
    println(encoded)
    // {"base64Input":"UE5HX0lNQUdFX0RBVEE="}

    // Deserializes JSON back into Value
    val decoded = Json.decodeFromString<Value>(encoded)
    println(decoded.base64Input.decodeToString())
    // PNG_IMAGE_DATA
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

### Delegate serialization to another serializer

You can serialize a class as another type by delegating the serialization logic to the serializer for that type.
For example, you can use this approach to serialize a class as a non-primitive type, such as an `IntArray`.

To delegate serialization, create a custom serializer that defines a property for the serializer of the delegated type and override the following:

1. The `descriptor` property to wrap the delegated serializer's `descriptor`.

    > When you delegate serialization, you can't use the original class `descriptor` or the delegated type's `descriptor` directly.

>     > Instead, you must create a new `descriptor` that wraps the delegated serializer's descriptor. For example, `override val descriptor = SerialDescriptor("my.app.Color", delegateSerializer.descriptor)`.

Reviewer: " For example, `override val descriptor = SerialDescriptor("my.app.Color", delegateSerializer.descriptor)" seems kinda redundant as we have the sample below. It also makes hint too big and large yellow spot steals attention

Author: removed it. 👍

   ```kotlin
   override fun serialize(encoder: Encoder, value: Type) =
       encoder.encodeStructure(descriptor) {
           encodeIntElement(descriptor, 0, value.first)
           encodeIntElement(descriptor, 1, value.second)
       }
   ```

5. Implement the `deserialize()` function using the [`decodeStructure()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/decode-structure.html) DSL.
   Inside its block, the lambda receiver is a [`CompositeDecoder`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-composite-decoder/), which you use to call functions like [`decodeIntElement()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-composite-decoder/decode-int-element.html) to decode each property.

   The decoding order may vary depending on the format.
   Use the [`decodeElementIndex()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-composite-decoder/decode-element-index.html) function to identify which `element()` to decode.

>    It returns [`CompositeDecoder.DECODE_DONE`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-composite-decoder/-companion/-d-e-c-o-d-e_-d-o-n-e.html) when no more elements are left, which you can use to stop decoding the current structure.

Author: thank you! 💯  changed wording (removed the can) to reflect this.

* Reusing default serialization behavior in subclasses that don't use a custom serializer.

You can keep the automatically generated serializer alongside your custom one by annotating the serializable class with [`@KeepGeneratedSerializer`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization/-keep-generated-serializer/).
To access the plugin-generated serializer, use the `.generatedSerializer()` function on the companion object of the serializable class.

This can also be useful when using a `JsonTransformingSerializer` to [adjust the JSON structure and reuse the plugin-generated serializer for the default serialization logic](serialization-transform-json.md#add-custom-behavior-to-the-default-serializer).

Here's an example that uses both a custom serializer and the plugin-generated serializer:

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*
import kotlinx.serialization.encoding.*
import kotlinx.serialization.descriptors.*

object ColorAsStringSerializer : KSerializer<Color> {

>     override val descriptor: SerialDescriptor = PrimitiveSerialDescriptor("my.app.Color", PrimitiveKind.STRING)

Reviewer: Should be `my.app.ColorAsString`, as my.app.Color is taken by generated serializer

    override fun serialize(encoder: Encoder, value: Color) {
        val string = value.rgb.toString(16).padStart(6, '0')
        encoder.encodeString(string)
    }

    override fun deserialize(decoder: Decoder): Color {
        val string = decoder.decodeString()
        return Color(string.toInt(16))
    }
}

//sampleStart
@OptIn(ExperimentalSerializationApi::class)
@KeepGeneratedSerializer
@Serializable(ColorAsStringSerializer::class)
class Color(val rgb: Int)

fun main() {
    val green = Color(0x00ff00)
    // Uses the custom serializer
    println(Json.encodeToString(green))
    // "00ff00"

    // Uses the plugin-generated serializer
    println(Json.encodeToString(Color.generatedSerializer(), green))
    // {"rgb":65280}

}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> ## Implement contextual serialization

Author: Good point - we will be revisiting this one at a later date, together with most parts about third-party serializers. 👍 

For now, I think because users who create custom serializers often need to apply them conditionally or to third-party types at runtime, so contextual serialization is a closely related application pattern, even if it isn’t custom serializer implementation.
